Hey guys welcome back to the course so in this lecture and in the section we're going to talk about
proposals now proposals are crucial to any development business that you run.
It's really just the process by which you give a proposal you propose a certain amount of work to a
potential client.
They are going to view that and either approve or deny or try to get an adjustment on whatever you've
proposed to them.
Now typically the way that this works is that when you first meet a potential new client you're probably
going to go over their idea over whatever it is that you're trying to build and you're probably going
to start off very vague.
The problem to talk in broad strokes they'll probably describe what they're doing in very generic terms
and then over time after you've done some back and forth back and forth maybe met their partners or
met other people that are involved in the project and after you've gone over more and more details and
hammered out really exactly what it is that they're trying to build and when they're trying to get it
done you will give them some form of a proposal.
Now it's very rare that you'll ever get to a situation where you don't give them a proposal and I'm
going to show you here in a second that there are different types of proposals and even in the least
formal most casual type of situation you will most likely end up giving them some form of a proposal
and it's something that I strongly suggest you pay attention to and strongly suggest that it's something
that you do so that you have your bases covered should any problem arise in the future.
So how important are proposals.
Well they're quite important in a lot of situations.
You can make or break a project and a lot of situations will be working with clients who are shopping
around through lots of different vendors.
And so this is kind of your final opportunity to make an impression on them and show them that you understand
their project the best and you can show them that you are proposing the best possible solution.
Now keep in mind proposals are meant to be shared and they're formatted in a way that can easily be
shown to other decision makers that are related to the client or in the client's organization.
So with that in mind it is important that you spend a little bit of time working on your proposal and
making sure that you follow some basic tenets so in this lecture we're just going to talk about the
types of proposals I'm going to introduce you to the three main types.
Show you some examples and just kind of graze over it a little bit so you can kind of get an idea of
when you should use which which type and what is each type good for.
OK so the first type is called a casual proposal.
So a casual proposal is pretty much exactly what you think it is a casual is kind of an off the cuff
proposal.
It's something that probably doesn't bring in a lot of outside material or a lot of outside documentation.
It's probably something that you did in a very quick manner.
The estimate you give is probably not very detailed and it's probably something that you do with projects
that are very very small.
Now I'll show you an example.
Ok so I just pulled this up and as you can see this is on our old letterhead but this will be an example
of a casual proposal and honestly this proposal might even be more complex than your typical proposal.
But in this situation what ended up happening was we had someone who was a prospective client ask us
a question about a potential idea.
And in this situation we gave them really what's called a casual proposal and in a casual proposal it's
typically when you respond just in email you give them some form of estimation but it's probably going
to be in a range.
And then you give a modest amount of information.
Now the proposal could be anywhere from one paragraph to three or four paragraphs.
The main point here is that this is just something that you kind of do on the fly.
There's no real presentation value to it.
The only thing you're really going to do is separate out the lines that you can see over here so they
can read it more easily and maybe bolding or something of that sort.
But you're not putting this into a fancy PTF you're not putting this into a template with a cover page
you're not even going to upload this onto a proposal site and send that to him.
It's something very very casual very simple.
Typically you'll be answering their questions give them a very quick rundown of what exactly you think
you would take and then give them a general idea of what you think the estimate should be.
And as you can see here we gave this person an estimate in ours and we did it in three different ways.
So they had asked to build an application a specific language so we gave them that.
Then they asked to do it in a different language.
We gave them that and they asked us about additional hours and additional estimate to make it tablet
and mobile compatible so we added that down here.
This is very very casual.
This is not very formal at all.
I signed off very casually I didn't ask for a signature and asked for a phone call.
It's just something for the reference.
OK so why would you use this.
Well typically the reason why you would give a casual estimation is generally in the case that you have
a request for proposal and it is not of a large enough size that you want to spend a lot of time on
it.
So that's one important point.
Very small projects typically are going to need casual proposals.
Now a lot of people ask if someone gives me a small potential project especially at the beginning because
I might be starved for projects is it OK to give a formal estimate or something more complex.
Yes it is OK.
But you need to keep in mind that you might actually seem a little out of touch or a little out of tone.
If someone asked for a $200 application get belt and you responded with an eight page PTF.
That's something you need to keep in mind.
A lot of the people that you work with a know or have worked with contractors before.
So you need to make sure that your tone kind of matches what exactly it is that you're building.
Now another thing to keep in mind with all casual proposals can be strategic.
Now what do I mean by that.
A lot of times and you give a casual proposal what you're doing is you're kind of showing the client
that hey this is not a very big project.
It's not a big deal.
Let me show you how easy it is.
What you're trying to do is essentially remove friction between them and starting the project.
And the way you do that is by not good letting them perceive the project as huge not perceiving it as
something that requires a lot of paperwork or has to go through a lot of things before they start.
The more things your client has to do before they actually start development means that they're taking
it more seriously.
But it also gives them more and more opportunities to realize how much money they're about to spend
and realize that maybe they want to work with a different vendor or maybe they want to change it or
maybe they want to show the project so you can use casual estimation as a way to kind of remove friction.
You can also use it as a way of introducing yourself to a client and saying you know this is the estimation
for your application if you want to go bigger or you want a really a more in-depth and complex estimation
you know show interest and we can re format it for you.
OK so keep in mind casual is what you're going to be doing a lot.
These are kind of off the cuff.
Typically they're going to be for people that you think their project is small or people that you're
trying to kind of ease into starting their project.
It also could be the case that you give a casual estimation to someone that you've worked with before.
So keep that in mind if you've worked with someone before.
It might not be worth it to give them a fancy complex flowery templated proposal that might be unnecessary.
They already know you that you like what you do and they probably don't need to be convinced of it already.
OK so the second one to get a cover is call a semi-formal and this is something that we use pretty much
all the time.
This is actually the farthest we go and I'll explain to you in a bit why we do that.
But the difference in semi-formal and casual is that when you give an estimation and you'll probably
give an estimation in their email but attached to that you give an in depth estimation.
Now the difference is is that in the e-mail you're simply changing the e-mail like your cover letter
and the e-mail you're going to answer any of their questions.
You're going to detail out what you think about their proposal.
You're going to detail out the things like the timeline the total hours and you're going to detail out
now attached to the e-mail then you can give an estimation where it actually goes into the technical
it actually goes into the granular detail of what exactly is going to be built.
How much is it going to cost and when is it going to get done.
So I'll give you an example.
OK so here are two back to back Typically as you can see in the semi-formal spend a little bit more
time with more information gave long explanations gave a lot more information about their project.
And a lot of times gave my personal remarks personal thoughts about the project now and a casual proposal
for someone I've never worked with before with a small project.
I'm not going spend a ton of time thinking about their project ways that it's going to be successful
or ways that it can be successful or my thoughts about how it's going to fare in the more general ecosystem.
All of that's kind of unnecessary and he spent too much time on casual proposals you can kind of get
turned into a swamp.
So in this situation yeah I just gave him more information here I asked for clarification on this estimate
and then the bulk of the estimate was actually explaining how we do our development explaining agile
and then explaining some of the other issues that arise things like graphic design things like what
it's going to take to put this in tablet or make it tablet compatible or make it wet or mobile compatible
then attached to it.
You can see that we just gave actual estimates that are in detail and so this is would be an estimate.
Now this estimate by itself is just talking about the work that's required.
It talks about the hours it talks.
It just gives Common's it's nothing way to fancy but it is very very specific.
So semi-formal as you can see very casual in a sense but it's formal in a sense and that's why I call
it semi-formal it's formal because you spent time thinking about their application and it's formal in
the sense that you actually spent time making a comprehensive estimate and sending that to them and
showing them on a granular level what cost what takes what time.
But the casual side of it is that it's all done through an e-mail right here sending it to them directly
to their e-mail.
It's not mailed to them.
It's not in a PowerPoint presentation.
OK.
So now I'm going to give you a quick introduction to the last one.
So the last type of proposal is a complex formal.
Now this is something that we don't actually do ourselves and we'll talk about this in a separate lecture
why we pick the type of proposals that we do.
Now you've probably when you think of proposals you probably think of these complex formal typically
what these are are these are for large projects.
These are more often for projects that require multiple people to buy into the project.
Now what do I mean by that if you're talking to your client that's one person typically when you give
a formal estimate you're going be assuming that they're not the only person who has say yes before you
start the project.
It could be them plus their partner.
It could be them plus their project team could be them plus their boss.
So if that's the case you might want to give them something that's fancy or something they can show
off and something that they can feel better about presenting to other people.
Now a formal estimate and the reason why I call it complex slash form is because it's it is formal in
that it's going to use a template.
It's a cover page but it's also complex and that it needs the most level of detail you possibly can.
Now the times you would use a formal complex again would be if you thought the project was large enough
to warrant making such an end time investment writing a formal investment can take a serious chunk of
time.
I've done them before.
It took half a day to put together.
That's a lot of time that you could've been spending on something else so it's only usually used in
a situation where the projects either are very large or it's a project that's medium sized that you
are confident you can close.
Now I'll give you an example.
OK so here's a great example of a complex estimation.
Now in this example actually brought up one of the digital firms that we had previously gone over when
we talked about other studios and the web presences that they choose and the messaging that they choose
to represent themselves.
So this firm is called Octa and this is actually an old estimate that I have the privilege of sharing.
But what you can see here is it something that they spent a lot of time into.
You can also notice that it's going to be branded.
And you'll notice that it has lots and lots of pages to it.
And in this case we have 10 pages.
So this is something that you'd expect with a complex formal multiple pages separated as a PDA probably
has graphic design involved probably has lots of supporting and lots of auxillary information attached
to it.
So as you can see here when we jump right in we even have pages that have absolutely nothing to do with
what the application was asking for has nothing to do with the scope of what we were getting a proposal
for what it is it's quite literally an introduction from the CEO and then an introduction to what the
firm does.
And then as we move down farther we get a little bit more specific as to what exactly it's going to
be doing and we start working with Timeline and more and more details and then we can talk about budgets
and then the very end we have attachments where we do things like reference's contact and core team.
Now keep in mind all complex formal proposals are different.
We're going to go over in one of the next elector's how exactly you can put together one of these proposals
do it cheaply do it easily and without a ton of headaches but you can do it whatever way you want.
There's a lot of customization.
There's a lot of different ways you can do it.
There's a lot of unnecessary fluff involved in the process.
You're more than welcome to cut that out as you see fit.
OK guys so now you should be familiar with how proposals generally work.
There are some other exceptions out there but generally they're going to fall into these three buckets.
These are the three that I suggest you focus on.
I suggest you familiarize yourself just a little bit before you jump into the client relationship game
when you do start meeting with clients that will start asking for proposals so you need to be prepared
with what you're going to show them what information you're going to include and which of these three
do you think is appropriate and which of these three do you think fits what you're trying to sell the
best.
OK.
So in the next lecture we're going to just go over really quickly the type of estimation that we use.
I'm going to show you one of our other proposals and talk a little bit more in-depth about why we chose
that style why it's important and why we think you should do the same.
All right in the next picture.